[docs] Improve and organize EAS environment variables (#41604)
expo/expo: docs/pages/eas/environment-variables/index.mdx

sidebar_title: Overview
description: An overview of how to use Expo Application Services (EAS) environment variables across builds, updates, and workflows.
searchRank: 8
---

import { BookOpen02Icon } from '@expo/styleguide-icons/outline/BookOpen02Icon';

import { BoxLink } from '~/ui/components/BoxLink';
import { Terminal } from '~/ui/components/Snippet';
import { Step } from '~/ui/components/Step';

[Environment variables in Expo](/guides/environment-variables) explains how environment variables work with Expo framework and **.env** files to set environment variables that can be inlined in your app's JavaScript/TypeScript code. In this process, Expo CLI substitutes prefixed variables in your code (for example, `process.env.EXPO_PUBLIC_VARNAME`) with the corresponding value set in the **.env** files on your development machine.

Since **Expo Application Services (EAS)** such as EAS Build and EAS Workflows jobs run on a remote server, **.env** files from your local machine are not available to these jobs. For instance, if **.env** files are excluded from project's version control, that is they are listed in the **.gitignore** file or not committed.

> Additionally, you may want to use environment variables outside of your project's code to customize your app binary at build time. For example, you want to set bundle identifier or a private key for an error reporting service. To accommodate these needs, EAS provides a separate mechanism for environment variables. This mechanism is focused on storing and managing environment variables oon EAS servers and synchronizing them for local development.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
During a local development, environment variables are loaded from your local `.env` or `.env.local` files. These files are generally excluded from the project's version control (that is they are listed in the **.gitignore** file or not committed) so they are not available for jobs that run on a remote server such as EAS Build and EAS Workflows. Additionally, most projects have multiple app variants and thus require multiple sets of environment variables (for instance Development and Production). In short, we need to:
- access environment variables from a remote server
- configure separate sets of environment variables for Development and Production
- be able to pull the environment variables down as needed for local development

These are the problems that EAS Environment Variables is built to solve. With EAS Environment Variables, the variables are configured in EAS via the EAS CLI or directly on the expo.dev website, and can be accessed by EAS Build, EAS Workflows as well as your local machine via a the EAS CLI.
```

## Quick start

<Step label="1">

To create a new environment variable, use the EAS CLI and run the following command inside your project directory. The following command creates a new environment variable with the name `EXPO_PUBLIC_API_URL` and the value `https://api.example.com` for the `production` environment.

<Terminal
  cmd={[
    '$ eas env:create --name EXPO_PUBLIC_API_URL --value https://api.example.com --environment production --visibility plainText',
  ]}
/>

</Step>

<Step label="2">

Verify if the environment variable is created successfully by confirming it appears with the **production** badge in the [Environment variables](https://expo.dev/accounts/[account]/projects/[project]/environment-variables) in your project settings. You canm

</Step>

<Step label="3">

To use the environment variable in EAS Build, add `environment` field to the `prodcuction` build profile:

```json eas.json
{
  "build": {
    "production": {
      "environment": "production"
    }
  }
}
```

> Any environment variable that is created for the `production` build profile will be available during the build process.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now any environment variables that is created for the `production` build profile will be available during the build process.
```

</Step>

<Step label="4">

To use the environment variable with EAS Update, run the `eas update` command with the `--environment` flag specified:

<Terminal cmd={['$ eas update --environment production']} />

The `--environment` flag is used to specify the environment to use for the update job. Only the environment variables from the specified environment will be used during the update process.

</Step>

<Step label="5">

> To use the environment variable with EAS Hosting, run the `eas deploy` command with the `--environment` flag specified:

Reviewer: Sadly this only works for server side env vars. This is the full set of what you need to do for both client and server side env vars to be set AND you can't use any of type secret in server nor client.

```sh
eas env:pull --environment production
npx expo export --platform web
eas deploy --environment production
```

I think we should mention it here briefly and then link to where this is now https://docs.expo.dev/eas/hosting/environment-variables/#client-side-environment-variables (in the usage section I think)

<Terminal cmd={['$ eas deploy --environment production']} />

The `--environment` flag is used to specify the environment to use for the deploy job. Only the environment variables from the specified environment will be used during the deploy process.

</Step>

> ## Why use EAS environment variables

Reviewer: Could this section can be near the top? I added a suggestion that had bullet points which overlap with this, this could essentially replace my bullet point suggestion.

- Keep configuration in one place for cloud builds, updates, and workflows without committing **.env** files.
- Separate values by environment (`development`, `preview`, `production`) while reusing names.
- Control visibility (plain text, sensitive, secret) so only the right surfaces can read each value.
- Apply the same set locally with [`eas env:pull`](/eas/environment-variables/manage/#pull-variables-for-local-development) or inside CI/CD.

## Key concepts

### Available environments

> By default, EAS supports three environments for environment variables: `development`, `preview`, and `production` environments. You can create a custom environment by adding a new environment to the **eas.json** file.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
By default, EAS supports three environments for environment variables: `development`, `preview`, and `production` environments. Custom environment names are available on Enterprise and Production plans.
```

searchRank: 8
---

import { BookOpen02Icon } from '@expo/styleguide-icons/outline/BookOpen02Icon';

import { BoxLink } from '~/ui/components/BoxLink';
import { Terminal } from '~/ui/components/Snippet';
import { Step } from '~/ui/components/Step';

This guide explains how to use Environment Variables in Expo Application Services (EAS) &mdash; Build, Updates, Workflows, and Hosting. For general information on how environment variables work with the Expo framework, refer to [Environment variables in Expo](/guides/environment-variables).

During a local development, environment variables are loaded from your local **.env** or **.env.local** files. These files are generally excluded from the project's version control (that is, if they are listed in the **.gitignore** file or not committed) so they are not available for jobs that run on a remote server, for example, EAS Build and EAS Workflows. Additionally, most projects have multiple app variants and require multiple sets of environment variables (for instance Development and Production).

## Why use EAS environment variables

> To summarize, you need to:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You might want to use EAS Environment Variable if you need to:
```
